<!-- 
pandoc --filter pandoc-citeproc --bibliography /Users/sharper/Active/Papers/MethodBoxDS/JMIR/citeulike-library.bib  --csl /Users/sharper/Active/Papers/MethodBoxDS/JMIR/journal-of-medical-internet-research.csl  MethodBoxDS.md -o mbr.html
	
LaTeX Title:  Data Science Needs Single-Field Natural Language Search Interfaces for Variable Search.
LaTeX Author: Simon Harper  
        Caroline Jay 
Base Header Level: 3
latex mode: memoir
latex input mmd-memoir-begin-doc
latex footer: mmd-memoir-footer
Date:   April 10, 2015  

-->



# Abstract
Data Discovery, particularly the discovery of key variables and their inter-relationships is key to secondary data analysis, and in-turn, the evolving field of Data Science. Current interfaces make a presumption that their users are experts within the domain, and, therefore, provide complex advanced interfaces to support these 'experts'. These interfaces hark back to a time when searches needed to be accurate first time as there was a high computational cost associated with each search. However, the cross-disciplinary nature of Data Science can make no assumptions as to the domain expertise of a particular scientist, whose interests may intersect many domains. In this case, scientists performing secondary data analysis share more in common with the 'Google Generation' than with their single-domain, single-tool forebears. Here we report the results of a study evaluating two user interfaces that provide access to survey data stored in the UK Data Archive (UKDA). One user interface is based on a 'Google-like' Web Search interface that enables users to browse, search for and view metadata for individual factors and variables; the other provides a Traditional Search user interface. We find that Web Search interfaces fit variable data discovery needs and expectations better than the traditional, because they are consistent with modern search interfaces and are, therefore, familiar across domains. Further, they allow queries to be refined as the search proceeds and acknowledge serendipity as part of this refinement. The results provide strong evidence that Data Science should adopted single-field natural language search interfaces for variable search supporting in particular: query reformulation; data browsing; faceted search; surrogates; relevance feedback; summarisation, analytics and visual presentation. 

# Introduction

Data Science spans many domains from the biological sciences, medical informatics, health care, social sciences and the humanities. Further, it heavily influences economics, business and finance. The 'Big data' or 'Broad data' used in Data Science is extensively used for  secondary analysis (using existing data to answer new research questions)  due to its size, cost, and the specialists tools needed in its gathering. Indeed, this data reuse is critical for both application and data mashups and acknowledges the cross-disciplinary of the gathered data and its importance in combinatorial use? In this case Data Discovery, particularly the discovery of key variables and their inter-relationships is key to finding and understanding data. Further, in the cross-disciplinary area of Data Science we can make no assumptions as to the domain expertise of a particular data scientist, whose interests may intersect many domains. 

Secondary data analysis has a number of key functions [@law2005reduce] in relation to Data Science: it allows researchers to link datasets to answer questions that the files could not address adequately in isolation [@Fienberg:1985aa]; it creates opportunities to explore associations between factors that were not anticipated at the time of data collection [@Dale1988Doing]; and it has value from an ethical perspective by increasing the potential benefits to society arising from public investment in the collection of the original data [#law2005reduce]. We can see that secondary data analysis is essential to many areas of science and policy research, but it is often impeded by difficulties in data discovery; finding the most appropriate data to use for analysis can be problematic. Typically, the researcher needs to find a handful of appropriate variables among collections of thousands, often spread across multiple datasets such as successive years of a repeated survey. Current data archive information systems do not optimally support this search process; indeed they make a presumption that their users are experts within the domain, and, therefore, provide complex advanced interfaces to support these 'experts'. These interfaces hark back to a time when searches needed to be accurate first time as there was a high computational cost associated with each search. In this case, data scientists share more in common with the `Google Generation' than with their single-domain, single-tool forebears. 

Anecdotally, following Web Search interface design (best expressed by 'Google', 'Bing', 'Ask', etc.) would seem like best practice, but there is little empirical evidence to support such a claim. While the need to improve access to data for research purposes is recognised [#Esrc2009National], no studies to date have directly examined how the user interface of tools providing access to archives impacts on the researcher's ability to discover and extract relevant data. Here, we report the results of a study conducted in collaboration with the [UK Data Archive (UKDA)](http://www.data-archive.ac.uk/)[^esds], the largest collection of digital research data in the social sciences and humanities in the UK. 

[^esds]: At the time of the study, access to data stored in the UKDA -- including Government and other large-scale surveys -- was formally provided by the Economic and Social Data Service (ESDS - http://www.esds.ac.uk), a data archiving and dissemination service supporting the secondary use of data in both research and teaching. ESDS provided access to a wealth of data and had more than 250 research institutions registered to use its services. 

Searching and accessing data from within this archive was not a trivial process, however, due to two key issues [#Thew2010MethodBox]. Firstly, researchers had to work out which of the more than 5,000 datasets stored in the UKDA could most appropriately be used to answer their research question. Getting a sufficient overview of what was available in each set was difficult, and researchers often picked certain datasets simply because they were familiar with them [#freese2009secondary]. Identifying the appropriate variables within a dataset was a second problem. Surveys typically contain hundreds, if not thousands of variables (the Health Survey for England 2007, for example, contains more than 2,000), and variable labels may not obviously reflect their content. To accurately identify variables of interest, the researcher must read the original questionnaire alongside supporting documentation, a process that can take days or weeks of work, and which may ultimately be fruitless: until the researcher has completed the process they do not necessarily know if the dataset can answer their research question. Whilst fully understanding a dataset and reading its documentation is important to the research process, it would save researchers a great deal of time if they could limit this in-depth exploration to datasets that were likely to be useful to them. Understanding other aspects of data use, such as how derived variables have been constructed, or how data from a number of years can be compared, is also problematic. 

Current systems can be thought of as divided into two categories: (1) those which use a traditional advanced search interface [#6182576], which expects accurate queries, patient users, moderated and homogeneous data; and, (2) those which use a Web Search interface which expects vague queries, impatient users and an enormous and rapidly expanding collection of unmoderated, heterogeneous data [#smyth2004exploiting]. We suggest that variable search for secondary analysis has more in common with the hostile search environment of the modern Web than it does with Traditional Search. 

In this case, our experiment compares one interface based on a 'Google-like' Web Search interface that enables users to browse, search for and view metadata for individual factors and variables; the other provides a traditional advanced search user interface (which presumes the user knows what they are looking for). Although more data archives do now have this kind of interface, our work is important because there is very little empirical work looking at the benefits of the search interface versus traditional advanced search interfaces.

Our controlled evaluation compares the effectiveness and efficiency of these two competing approaches to variable data discovery; Traditional Advanced Search against Web Search. We find that Web Search interfaces fit variable data discovery needs and expectations better than the traditional, because they are consistent with modern search interfaces and are, therefore, familiar across domains. Further, they allow queries to be refined as the search proceeds and acknowledge serendipity as part of this refinement. 

The results provide strong evidence that DataScience should adopted single-field natural language search interfaces for variable search, conforming to ''Marchionini's Human-Computer Information Retrieval'' (HCIR) framework [#marchionini2006toward] and in particular supporting: query reformulation; data browsing; faceted search; surrogates; relevance feedback; summarisation, analytics and visual presentation. 

# Background

There are numerous Websites that provide access to the results of large-scale surveys (for example the [Office for National Statistics](http://www.ons.gov.uk) in the UK, [Eurostat](http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu) in the EU and the [Bureau of Labor Statistics](http://www.bls.gov/data/) and [Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research (IPCSR)](http://www.icpsr.umich.edu) in the US. Until recently, the majority of survey repositories primarily used Traditional Search for the discovery of entire datasets, although the inclusion of Web Search interfaces for variable data discovery is becoming more common. Both the IPCSR Website and the [Rand Survey Metadata Repository](https://mmicdata.rand.org/megametadata/), provide access to a number of quantitative surveys conducted around the world and offers a facility for searching datasets at the level of variables. [As detailed in Section](#impact), following this study the UKDA also now supports variable data discovery using a Web Search interface.

## Traditional Search Interfaces

Traditional Advanced Search, and the interfaces which facilitate it are based on a number of long-held premises. The most noteworthy -- in this context -- are the presumptions that the interface can expect accurate queries, that users are patient, and that the data will be moderated and homogeneous [#6182576]. In some cases, especially within the scientific research domain, these assumptions hold true. In other cases, however, they do not reflect reality. This seems especially to be the case with regard to searches of variable data sets which seem to have more in common with the heterogeneity of the open Web. Increasingly, Traditional Search interfaces focused on delivering well-curated datasets (often already known to the user) are now looking for novel ways to fill the user expectation gap [#TorresParejo20135448]. These systems are increasingly recognising that providing access to relevant information adapted to the needs and the context of the user is a real challenge [#978-3-642-32498-7_19] and that contextual results are becoming more important. Furthermore, evidence suggests that the Traditional Search model predicated on users searching for particular information, the so-called 'information need', may not be as important as navigational searches [#Broder:2002:TWS:792550.792552]. Indeed, understanding the underlying goals of user searches is becoming increasingly important; for instance the previously unexplored 'resource-seeking' [#Rose:2004:UUG:988672.988675] goal may account for a larger fraction of Web Searches than previously thought.

Traditional Search expects the user to have well-defined boundaries for the information they are looking for, along with a good knowledge of the terms and meta-information that may be used to describe that information. This is increasingly not the case, especially in the context of variable data discovery and user-centred approaches [#10.1007/978-3-642-36415-0_3] so common in the broad domain of Data Science. 

## Web Search Interfaces

Web Search, and its offshoot of HCIR, recognise the deficiencies in the Traditional Search model, and thus expect vague queries, impatient users and an enormous and rapidly expanding collection of unmoderated, heterogeneous data [#smyth2004exploiting]. Indeed, the model of Traditional Search is changing, with the widespread use of Web Search engines, employment of simple queries, and decreased viewing of results pages -- changes that have resulted from algorithmic enhancements by Web Search engine companies [#Jansen2006248]. Large providers, such as Google, run around 10,000 experiments per year in an attempt to refine both the search engine, and the search interface and interactivity [#Varian2012Statistics]. We could arguably conclude that this tempo of experimentation makes these kinds of search engines de-facto best practice for all other search instruments -- the latter not being able to match the former's ability to adapt and refine their algorithms and interactions; a trend we can see in search result clustering [#gong2013interactive], for instance.

It is therefore not surprising that about 85% of Internet users surveyed claim to use search engines and search services to find specific information [#Kobayashi:2000:IRW:358923.358934]. These users have expectations that bleed from Web Search into all other areas which require search. To a naive user, all search activity is the same [#doi:10.1061/(ASCE)CP.1943-5487.0000229]. In this case, we suggest that variable search for secondary analysis has more in common with the extremely hostile search environment of the modern Web than it does with Traditional Search.

## Faceted Search and the Google Generation

The move from Traditional Search to Web Search may be a result of changes in user attitudes and needs. 'The Google Generation' appears to behave very differently to older generations [#rowlands2008google]. They are less confident about their searching prowess, demonstrated by the fact that they viewed fewer pages, visited fewer domains and undertook fewer searches than older users [#zhang2008undergraduate]. Also, tellingly, their search statements were much more the product of cut and paste. These characteristics -- of relying less on working memory and demonstrating lower competence at multi-tasking -- has knock-on implications for researching in an online environment [#nicholas2010behaviour][#spring2010health]. To overcome some of these limitations, we have seen a rise in faceted search, which combines query and browse strategies interactively providing an iterative way to refine search results [#Zhang:2012:FSH:2232817.2232924]. Faceted search allows users to start very generally and then iteratively refine their searches by allowing them to selectively apply multiple filters. These filters can be based on taxonomies [#Wei:2013:SFS:2481562.2481564], simple classifications systems [#Zhang:2012:FSH:2232817.2232924], or other spatial locations [#MEET:MEET14504901328] -- in some cases they are generated from search results sharing some common overlap [#Wei:2013:SFS:2481562.2481564]. This faceted approach dovetails into the evolving behaviours of the Google Generation, and assists in complex decision-making [#ASI:ASI21647]

## Beyond Web Search

For reasons ranging from an obligation to curiosity, Web Search is now moving beyond the individual and into the social [#mislove2006exploiting]. Users have a strong inclination to seek information from others during the search process. Indeed, search systems using statistical analytics over traces left behind by others can help support the search experience [#chi2009information]. Furthermore, result clustering based on social networks 